Scoring Rubric
Your presentation will be assessed based on the following criteria:
    1. Presentation addressed each aspect of the prompt
    2. The presentation was clear and well-organized
    3. The presenter spoke clearly, made effective use of eye contact, and demonstrated interest and/or authority in the subject matter.
Peer Review
Each student in the class will be responsible for providing feedback on each of the other student presentations in the class. Students should use the assignment description and rubric to guide their review. These peer reviews will be due before class the Tuesday after the presentation. (Example: if student A presents on Feb 6, all other students will provide feedback by Feb 11.) These reviews should include the following:
     1. Describe one (or more) positive aspects of the presentation.
    I thought that your presentation was organized well. You definitely knew what you were talking about, and were very relaxed during the presentation. The slides had good examples of how to use the package skimr. Your flow was good in that you were not just reading off of slides, but actually having a discussion about skimr. The slides themselves had a lot of interesting graphics and examples.

    2. Provide constructive criticism of one (or more) aspects of the presentation that you feel could be improved. As this is constructive, provide some justification and/or advice on ways to improve.
    Looking at the slides after the presentation, it was clear that you were talking about skimr. However, I remember not being sure what package was being discussed a few slides into presentation and waiting for a few slides to see skimr again. This was partially my own inattention, and not being aware that the presentation had started until a few slides in. Projecting more to get the attention of the audience may help this.
    As a nitpicking thing, there could be more eye contact and engagement with the audience in general. You have very informative things to say, and should demand people's attention. This may also be helped by projecting more, and looking at your audience to engage them more.
Great presentation!
